For text that have been abandoned.

## OLD INTRO PART

First, selection is less effective because selection can not act on loci independently, as loci are physical linked in asexuals 8–11. This translates into reduced rates of adaptation and increased rates of mutation accumulation in asexuals compared with sexuals. A related consequence is the change in genomic content of repetitive elements that proliferate independently of the host cell cycle, i.e. transposable elements (TEs). Verbal and theoretical arguments predict a very rapid accumulation of TEs following the transition to asexuality and/or a loss of TEs from genomes with time, because of coupled fates of TEs and hosts 12–14. Second, levels of heterozygosity are predicted to change depending on how asexuality is achieved (i.e. the cytology or “mode” of asexuality). In “effectively asexual” organisms, in which recombination between alleles is absent, heterozygosity levels increase over time, because haplotypes accumulate mutations independently from each other and diverge intra-individually 7. Such “effectively asexual” organisms include asexuals that reproduce via apomixis (mitotic generation of offspring) and asexuals that use some specific forms of automixis (meiotic generation of offspring) in which haplotypes segregate independently (e.g. centra fusion, terminal fusion with inverted meiosis) 6,15. Contrary, for asexual organisms that use forms of meiosis that homogenizes haplotypes (e. g. gamete duplication, terminal fusion) heterozygosity should be declining. The initial amount of heterozygosity present in a novel asexual lineage is further dependent on how transition to asexuality is achieved 3(REFs). For example, spontaneous occurrence of asexual individuals through tychoparthenogenesis results in homozygous genomes (REFs). Transition to asexuality through hybridization will retain haplotype heterozygosity present as the divergence between the parental lineages (REFs).  A third prediction of genome evolution under asexuality is that genome structure is free to evolve, because homologous chromosomes do not pair in (effectively) asexual organisms. This potentially results in large-scale structural variations, including duplications, inversions and palindromes (REFS). Additionally, this is also why forth, effectively asexual organisms are theoretically more likely to retain horizontally transferred genes (HGT) (REFS). Both structural variants and HGT could provide substrate for adaptation in asexuals and thus generating novelty 16.

What exactly do we have / do we look for? Because then we only explain this. Not everything like novelty (HGT) etc, if we do not look into this.

Many of the above mentioned consequences have been elucidated in whole genome studies. To date, 24 asexual genomes of animals of 17 different lineages have been sequenced : Cerapachys biroi, Adineta vaga, Folsomia candida, Leptopilina clavipes, Diploscapter coronatus, D. pachys, Panagrolaimus davidi, Meloidogyne incognita, M. javanica, M. arenaria, M. floridensis, M. enterolobii, Daphnia pulex, Hypsibius dujardini, Ramazzottius varieornatus, Procambarus virginalis, and Poecilia formosa (Table 1). These lineages differ in the mode of asexuality and how transition to asexuality was achieved. All of these studies focused on either a single asexual lineage or a multiple lineages of the same origin. Albeit studies focused on some aspects, most studies did not elucidate all of the above mentioned consequences of asexuality. Moreover, different studies used a different range of methods for the detection of patterns. Because of these biological and methodological reasons, common, shared features of the genomic consequences of asexuality are currently unknown.
Here, we review above mentioned published findings and perform a meta-analysis of the published genomes using a custom computational pipeline, in order to make results comparable with the goal to detect shared genomic features of asexuality.
For this, we gathered all available genome assemblies, raw reads and genome annotations of all asexual genomes that were available (table XXX). We identified signatures of…



___________________________________

In the absence of sex every individual is representing its own lineage, mutations are the only mechanism that can create a novel combination of loci within a genome. Horizontal gene transfer (here considered as a type of mutation) was one of a suggested mechanisms bringing novelties into genomes helping in long term survival.
Evolutionary speed
On the other hand loss of heterozygous loci, intra genome variants, can be a direct consequence of the type of asexual reproduction. Gamete duplication is a type of asexuality where haploid gamete will duplicate the genome to restore diploid state. Such individuals are fully homozygous. Automixis, meiotic asexuality, involves recombination of parental chromosomes. Automixis with central fusion will leads to a loss of heterozygosity everywhere where the organism have recombined, while automixis with terminal fusion leads to a loss of heterozygosity on the non-recombined parts of a genome. Either the way automixis is going to reduce heterozygosity over time, in case of terminal fusion the remaining heterozygous loci should tend survive longer close to telomeres contrary to central fusion where heterozygosity might be maintained close to centromeres. Finally apomixis, mitotic asexuality or parthenogenesis, is predicts offsprings to differ to a mother just by a between generation mutation load. Apomixis is expected to accumulate divergence between haplotypes over time in the absence of recombination and gamete fusion. However, another mechanism have been suggested to slow or reverse the process of mutation accumulation - gene conversion. Gene conversion is happening during recombination, but also during repairs of double strand breaks, which might be present even in species were recombination is completely absent. However gene conversion requires homologous regions in genomes. Gene conversion between homologous region of the same chromosome has been associated with genomic palindromes - a reverse complementary sequences potentially serving as a template for gene conversion. Gene conversion could potentially allow more effective purification of deleterious mutations and hence to delay Muller’s ratchet.
The expected genomic traits are also dependent on the origin of asexuality. The asexual species can either derive as an asexual lineage from a sexual population {ref Timema} or they can be a result of hybridization event {Lunt2014}. Identified asexual species of hybrid origin have a great deal of divergence between haplotypes corresponding to divergence of the parent sexual species.
Till now, 24 asexual genomes of animals of 17 different lineages have been sequenced : Cerapachys biroi, Adineta vaga, Folsomia candida, Leptopilina clavipes, Diploscapter coronatus, D. pachys, Panagrolaimus davidi, Meloidogyne incognita, M. javanica, M. arenaria, M. floridensis, M. enterolobii, Daphnia pulex, Hypsibius dujardini, Ramazzottius varieornatus, Procambarus virginalis, and Poecilia formosa (Table 1). Individual studies have confronted findings of the analysed genome to some of the expectations, however all of the studies have covered either a single asexual lineage or a multiple lineages of the same origin. Here we aim to both review findings of the individual studies and perform a meta analysis of the published genomes in order to make them comparable. We have gathered all the genome assemblies and their annotations of all asexual genomes that were available. We searched for palindromes and presence of core animal genes in genome assemblies. We also gathered one short read library of all sequenced genomes and used to evaluate the abundance of repetitions and heterozygosity levels (for details see SM).


